Recall that the mid-point price is the middle of the bid-ask spread.
Before we begin to execute a parent order,
the mid-point price can serve as
the benchmark from which we estimate the transaction cost.
For each child order that is traded,
the difference between the price paid and
this benchmark is a measure of the trade cost which is called slippage.
We can think of slippage as the sum of two kinds of price impact.
There's the temporary price impact and permanent price impact.
Temporary impact refers to the slippage that always
exists even when the bid-ask spread does not change.
This is because, the price you pay when buying
the asset is always a bit more than the mid-point benchmark price.
The permanent impact refers to an actual shift in
the bid-ask spread and therefore, the mid-point price.
This is what we refer to when we say a trade is
large enough that it begins to impact the market price.
Here's an example of how a sell order is broken up into several child orders,
where the orders are shown as red triangles.
Looking at the chart from left to right, we can see that,
during the execution of the sell order,
the price initially drops quite a bit which becomes a cost of the transaction.
Some of this price shift may have been due to the market participants as a whole
and some of it could have been due to the individual trader himself.
Note that, we can't be sure what part of the price drop is caused
by our own trading or by the rest of the markets trading.
It could be the case that the price would have dropped without us making any trades.
In which case, our decision to sell the asset was a good decision.
It could also be that our trades make up enough of
the total volume traded that we're moving the market price.
Near the middle of the chart,
we can see additional sell orders where the price did not drop significantly.
Here, we can assume more of the slippage is due to
temporary price impact unless it's due
to a permanent impact that has shifted the market price.